# Userlevel software compartmentalization (experimental)

CheriBSD implements two different
CHERI-enabled software compartmentalization models:

- **Colocated processes (co-processes) compartmentalization** accelerates
  UNIX Inter-Process Communication (IPC) and context switching by colocating
  multiple processes in the same address space, separating them using CHERI
  capabilities.  Support for co-processes is maintained in an experimental
  development branch and is not included in current software releases.
  For more information see the [Colocation Tutorial](https://github.com/CTSRD-CHERI/cheripedia/wiki/Colocation-Tutorial)
  wiki page.
- **Dynamic-linker-based compartmentalization** isolates shared libraries
  within a process using CHERI capabilities limiting the access of attackers
  who have achieved arbitrary code execution within a library.
  The linker-based library compartmentalization model has been included since
  the 22.12 release of CheriBSD.
  See the [c18n(3) man
  page](https://man.cheribsd.org/cgi-bin/man.cgi/releng-24.05/c18n)
  on an installed system for more information.

## Library compartmentalization

CheriBSD's library compartmentalization feature (c18n) executes each dynamic
library within a compartmentalization-enabled process in its own protection
domain.
When c18n is enabled, the run-time linker grants libraries capabilities only to
resources (global variables, APIs) declared in their ELF linkage. Function
calls that cross domain boundaries are interposed on by domain-crossing shims
implemented by the run-time linker.

The adversary model for these compartments is one of trusted code but
untrustworthy execution: a library such as `libpng` or `libjpeg` is trusted
until it begins dynamic execution -- and has potentially been exposed to
malicious data.
With library compartmentalization, an adversary who achieves arbitrary code
execution within the library at run time will be able to reach only the
resources (and further attack surfaces) declared statically through its
linkage.
The programmer must then harden that linkage, and any involved APIs, to make
them suitable for adversarial engagement -- but the foundation of isolation,
controlled access, and controlled domain transition is provided by the c18n
implementation.

In addition to a modified run-time linker, modest changes have been made to
the aarch64c calling convention to avoid assumptions such as implicit stack
sharing between callers and callees across library boundaries when passing
variadic argument lists.
This modified ABI is now used by all CheriABI binaries in CheriBSD, and so
off-the-shelf aarch64c binaries and libraries can be used with library
compartmentalization without recompilation to the modified ABI.
More information on library compartmentalization can be found in the
[c18n(3) man
page](https://man.cheribsd.org/cgi-bin/man.cgi/releng-24.05/c18n):

```
man c18n
```

## Enabling library compartmentalization system-wide

Compartmentalization can be enabled for all eligible new processes with
`sysctl`:

```
sysctl security.cheri.lib_based_c18n_default=1
```

## Enabling library compartmentalization temporarily for a particular binary

To run a particular binary with library compartmentalization enabled just for
this run, use `proccontrol`:

`proccontrol -m cheric18n -s enable ./helloworld`

## Enabling library compartmentalization by default for a particular binary

To enable library compartmentalization by default for a particular binary, run
the following command to set a flag in the binary:

```
elfctl -e +cheric18n ./helloworld
```

This can be reversed by replacing `+cheric18n` with `-cheric18n`.

You can confirm whether c18n is enabled for a binary by default using the
`elfctl` command:

```
elfctl ./helloworld
```

The output will contain two lines like the following indicating whether c18n is
enabled or disabled.

```
cheric18n       'Force Enable CHERI library-based compartmentalisation' is set.
nocheric18n     'Force Disable CHERI library-based compartmentalisation' is unset.
```

Note that `nocheric18n` _disables_ c18n for the binary by default even when it
is enabled system-wide.

## Tracing compartment-boundary crossings

The BSD ktrace(1) command is able to trace compartment-boundary crossings. To
enable this feature, set the `LD_UTRACE_COMPARTMENT` environmental variable,
which will cause the run-time linker to emit records using the utrace(2) system
call.
Run the program under ktrace with the `-tu` argument to capture only those
records (and not a full system-call trace):

```
env LD_UTRACE_COMPARTMENT=1 ktrace -tu ./helloworld
```

The resulting `ktrace.out` file can be viewed using the kdump(1) command:

```
kdump
```

It is important to understand, however, that simply isolating running code is
almost always insufficient to achieve robust sandboxing.
The competent adversary will now consider further rights and attack surfaces
to explore in search of further vulnerabilities.
While this increased work factor of finding additional vulnerabilities is an
important part of compartmentalization, internal software APIs are rarely well
suited to be security boundaries without performing additional hardening.
With this in mind, you can:

 * Inspect the source code, output from `objdump`, and output from
   `chericat` to assess the robustness of this compartmentalization.
   You can install `objdump` with `pkg64 install llvm-base` and `chericat` with `pkg64c install chericat`.
 * Consider larger software architectural changes that will allow a library
   to be used more robustly when running within a computerment.

Library compartmentalization has the potential to significantly improve
software integrity and confidentiality properties in the presence of a strong
adversary.
However, it is also limited by the abstraction being around the current
library operational model.
